welcome to inside out um
our purpose here this evening for those
of you who've never had a chance to join
us before is to
linger for a while um
on an example
of
the best in american science and medical
writing and with the consent and the
connivance of the author of that work
dissect it
take
it
as a
stellar example of craft
from which we can all learn
i should say at the outset that this is
a conversation not a lecture
and that i
both encourage and insist on your
interruptions uh what makes for uh the
best kind of uh inside out
is a digression that is prompted by
someone who uses the microphone that dan
has got so if you'd like to ask a
question just get his attention so that
we can capture
that for people who might want to watch
this later on the web
we live
in a golden age of science and medical
writing i think it it's uh you'd have to
go back to the lat to the to the 19th
century to find a time
when
the
literature of the laboratory
of the clinic
played such a big
role in popular
reading and um
unlike our our current uh professional
uh writing culture um
there is a a rich
tradition of practitioners and
scientists themselves uh being the ones
who write eloquently about uh new
developments directly for the public and
one
darwin of course is is the prime example
of this but it used to be the main
channel of communication from the
laboratory uh to the public and in
recent years we've really seen a revival
of this partly to the dynamics of
the publishing business partly through a
renewed
interest of the general public and
partly because a generation of unusually
eloquent uh and energetic practitioners
and scientists have come to the fore who
themselves write brilliantly we're very
very fortunate this evening that we have
one of those people with us tonight
siddhartha mukherjee thank you for
joining us
a uh
officially an assistant professor of
medicine at columbia university uptown
and he's also a staff
cancer physician at the columbia
university medical center
he is also author of the book that we
are here to discuss this evening um the
emperor of all maladies a biography of
cancer this is a book that
has been uh named by the new york times
is one of the 10 best books of 2010 um
one of the top 10 non-fiction books by
time magazine and in that uh
laying on of hands that all authors
today seek and are blessed to receive
named
by oprah
as one of her top 10 books of 2010.
what we're going to do
normally we talk to a journalist we talk
to a a uh a person who's whose uh
main practice is is uh writing
but occasionally we do like to look at
this
and we're informed by this
about the view from the other side of
the fence and in past uh seasons we've
been fortunate to have uh nobel laureate
frank wheelchair for instance um uh
nobel laureate ronald hoffman come talk
about their efforts to communicate
directly about their particular research
obsessions to the general public um
what's unusual i think about this book
and about you as a
as a writer is that you are
not um
putting out your theory of how this
works you're not uh uh giving us your
version of the higgs boson that you're
chasing or whatever you have actually
kind of tackled the history and the
character of a medical field and uh that
on the one hand is a very ambitious but
it's so
selfless if i can put it in such a funny
way so let's explore for a minute your
pedigree is a writer
now i know that uh
you come
to your current position through
stanford where you were an undergraduate
there you you wrote for the stanford
daily yeah yeah you've written
um
as a
generalist for the new england journal
for nature you've done book reviews
but you know when i was preparing for
this i couldn't help but notice that
prior to this current book the
the writing that you've seen more
in
in tune with
was the classical
peer-reviewed medical literature i just
pulled this one at random a
paper published earlier in your career
murine cytotoxic t lymphocytes recognize
an epitome in an ebna 1 fragment but
failed to lies eba na1 expressing mouse
cells this this is not the kind of pro
style that gets you up to the top ten
list so i wonder if you could just um
start our conversation
tell me a little bit about your pedigree
is a writer your pedigree is a doctor's
well-documented you know stanford
harvard columbia
the new england journal
how did you develop as a writer i'm told
you used to memorize great wads of
poetry when you were young is that where
it starts well i think it i mean i think
it starts with an interest in
storytelling i talk about that actually
in this book uh very much so
it starts off with
i think
i think if i have as you're pointing out
i had no theory to explain i have only
one theory to explain about writing
which is
uh good writing comes comes from good
reading
and so
i think of myself primarily as a reader
and i
i tried to incorporate all of that into
this into this book
i think
one of the things that's interesting to
me in the writing of this book in
particular
was that long before i knew the content
of this book
um i knew its mood um i knew its mood
yeah i had to say i had a sense of what
i mean you know i was thinking about
writing this book was obviously an
ambitious project i had never done
anything like this before um it
it the content was so enormous i mean
just this last year there were 300 000
books published 300 000 journal articles
published on cancer so you can see
you're
there's sort of like a fire hose of
information coming at you and your job
in my job in writing a book like this
was to
try to get at
um
sort of hitting the high hitting the
main important pieces of that
information but long before
all of that happened i spent a lot of
time thinking to myself what what should
one
feel like
in inhabiting this book
and
one the reader the reader yeah watch the
reader feel like and i gravitated to a
couple of books that were very important
for that uh for that and i learned from
them i sort of you know
really i spent a lot of time i read and
reread those books and i'll name them
we'll talk a little bit about them in
more detail i i was particularly
interested in richard rhodes book
i was very struck by that you you
mentioned that in your acknowledgments
and yes
lots of medical books and then suddenly
this
famously
well-done history of the making of the
atomic bomb yes i was very i was very
there were many there were very and i'll
talk i could talk more in detail about
what exactly so there was richard rhodes
book which i thought was particularly
interesting to me um
then there was uh i'll mention four
books and they're very different and
that's again trying to capture the set
of relationships here the second book
was tony judd's book which had just come
out when tony was a friend is was a
friend
um
called post-war
and so that was the second one the third
one
is the one that's perhaps most in the
left field but the one that i probably
returned to the most often
formally
and that is primo levy's book
survival in auschwitz which i came back
to auschwitz yeah i came back to over
and over again i had read his other
works um and i came back to his other
works as well but i came out to survive
in auschwitz over and over again and
then finally
a book that is rick large through this
book but in fact a book that i
don't borrow very much from formally
which is susan sontag's
illnesses metaphor
so there were sort of four books and if
you can imagine there's sort of four
books in mid-space
i i have a
i have a very peculiar
personal manner of writing which is i i
figured this out as i when i was
starting out this book i
um i thought i bought myself a very nice
desk and a beautiful chair
and i set myself up by the window and i
said you know this was in cambridge i
was in i was in harvard then and i said
muscle by the window and i spent hour
after hour writing absolutely nothing
and when i wrote something it was
complete junk
and so then i moved downstairs to the
living room and i sat so i set myself up
there and i wrote nothing again and so
finally after five or six such attempts
i ended up in bed
and i wrote my entire book in bed
i would you know literally i would put
all these books underneath my so richard
rose book all these books would be
stacked underneath the bed i could reach
into them and i could pull them out um
and on mornings like everyone else would
go off to work and i would be sort of
like the person in pajamas writing in
bed you have to ask and did your wife
have feelings about you turning the bed
into like your work area here your your
limits your library i mean would you
just like stack books on your house on
my house
yeah uh and so most most recently you
know i've been writing grants we i we
had a big paper out last year in nature
and so forth so and i realized to myself
that if you know if if if that what
works don't fix it so
um i i just recently moved my office to
colombia and for the first time in my
life i was given the luxury of you know
choosing things for my office people
shoes desks and chairs and so forth and
so i moved to bed i was going to do i
can't believe that you moved to bed here
yes i moved to bed into my office
thinking to myself you know since it's
the only place i can get work done in
you know why why fight
so okay
if you ever were to come up there is
literally i kid you not there is
literally a i mean it's folded up for
the most part ah
this could send a bad signal you know i
mean
so i moved into office and i i've been
you know productive that way but anyway
um
so
so you're right in bed but but but to
more serious yeah exactly to more
serious points you know
when
back back to the point of richard rhodes
book back to the point of
so i i i had something of i borrowed
something from
richard about
the way he enters this book again in a
very selfless manner
he has the contemplative quality of
of someone observing an enormous moment
in history a moment in history that you
know it really defines the beginning of
the atomic age for us but yet his touch
in that book is so sparing
um that it's unbelievable it's almost
like it's almost like you can move to
the entire book that the people who very
might realize that with the opening the
opening page of that book
is a real masterwork in in just being
the way it's crafted it brings you to a
moment in history uh where leo zillard
is stepping off a curb in london
and that um
that little thing that happens those
large steps of a curve of course becomes
such a large metaphor because it is in
fact mankind that's stepping off a curve
right but you don't realize that at the
first uh moment in that book this is
before the atom is first split
and
just taking you into this pre-atomic
world this naive innocent
world before atomic weapon before we
unleash the power of the atom and i was
thinking about it more recently because
of what's happening in japan
so anyway so that was one
thing
a tone a tone a tone exactly a toner a
kind of contemplative tone
a kind of
deeply deeply crafted and since he
really wanted to find out every little
piece what was the intersection between
whatever bloomsburg bloomsbury avenue
and shaftsbury avenue what is it like to
be there what is it like to visit there
that kind of tone to inhabit to bring to
that place um and then in contrast and
again just in the stark contrast and yet
achieving the same effect anyone who
people have read primo levy's book um
again that book is is motivated by tone
and the tone that that's very important
to me in that book is
is survival in auschwitz is a cool book
um and yet in a sense of being remote
yeah or perhaps detach but in
temperature it's a very cool book and
yet it's it's precisely
the temperature of the book that reminds
us how deep um how the depth of what is
happening here i mean
this is really that one of the
quintessential terms
of
um
suffering in the camps right now again i
don't make an idiotic analogy between my
book and survival in auschwitz but the
the more interesting thing to me was how
does one
as a writer achieve that place
where you can convey information in a
way that encourages a kind of dialogue
almost with with a reader um
but does so in a sparing way uh in a way
that's
that's not you know it's interesting to
me i would often reread sentences from
either richards or or primo's book and i
would wonder if there are three words
that are changed in that sentence
the entire tone of that sentence would
change the entire tone of the book would
change so how does one create how does
one then create that tone so this is a
very long way of saying that i had first
imagined the tone of my book the mood of
my book long before i had imagined the
content of the book
and that was my first step well you
clearly but the outset made a very
interesting decision about
this book which was to cast what is in
fact a history of
the study and experience of cancer from
prehistoric time well 2500 bc or so uh
to the present um not as a history not
as a technical adventure story of uh
but as a biography of a disease right um
what was your idea there well so you
know
there were
that is a complicated
as you can imagine particularly for a
scientist that is a complicated
uh
that is a complicated step and by that i
mean the following i mean um
using the word biography in the context
of disease always brings up the specter
for a scientist
of over
anthropomorphizing disease or illness
and yet on the flip side i kept saying
to myself well my with my patients when
patients encounter illness particularly
when they encounter cancer happens to be
the illness that i'm most familiar with
they do imagine uh themselves uh
inhabiting as susan sontek very very
much put it as becoming citizens of
another country
visiting another kingdom you know the
opening court of the bukhari in a second
um their imagination is one of it's a
very visceral imagination it's not an
imagination of history it's an
imagination of inhabitation they inhabit
a different place someone they they
imagine illness in a very very visceral
as i said way and so i said to myself
you know if that's the case then why
why beat around the bush about it why
not then call this book of biography
because in general of course the the
original subtitle of the book was a
history of cancer and it just didn't
feel right to the project it didn't feel
appropriate to the project in other
words
um
historians generally don't tend to enter
their own histories
you know sometimes they do but they
generally don't tend to the project
seemed too visceral and in the end
i kept thinking to myself you know i'm
drawing a portrait of something over
time i'm drawing a portrait of breast
cancer in
1850 and the same portrait again in 1890
the same portrait again with changes in
1910 in 1950 200 in 2000
and that is a biography you know this
idea of repeatedly revisiting the same
portrait the idea the imagination of
breast cancer in this in this particular
case and so i said finally at the end
actually the the
the subtitle history had persisted right
through the penultimate draft and then i
had i changed that in the end and said
well you know this to me this project
feels more like
as i said biography and
that that that
that change that shift
uh was and continues to be criticized uh
some people don't like that some people
don't like the idea of of of recasting
this as biography um and i i think that
that that leads to an interesting
conversation usually and so i sort of
put it out there as as as as a more as a
more provocative way of thinking about
this book well i thought it did a very
it had a very interesting effect i mean
cancer as a topic um
as a condition uh as a cultural metaphor
i mean
it's very high pitch it's very charged
and there's a very high level of
propagandizing that that goes on right
which you
delve into in some portions of your book
when you're talking about the laskers
for instance um
i thought that by casting this biography
had had the the effect of somehow taking
that down a notch
and allowing
a certain distance um that was
informative so
introduce us to this character
that you're writing a biography of
introduce us to
the the personage of cancer sure i mean
it's a little bit like i mean there's a
quote here that i that i picked up from
lewis carroll which is you know um
uh you know the in the hunting of the
snark the
this team of people goes out to hunt the
snark
and uh
that
carol is one of pharaoh's last somewhat
mad poems um with all sorts of
mathematical inferences inside the poem
but anyway um and in the end
the snark that they're everyone's going
out to hunt
basically vanishes into nothing it
becomes a hunt becomes a kind of futile
hunt um and to some extent i think some
of them actually use that in the book uh
something it happens
to cancer
in the 1940s 1910s we imagine that there
is one monolithic entity called cancer
big c cancer for which there will be one
monolithic big c cure
with one medicine
or one series of medicines one family
medicines and as we enter the the actual
history that begins to fade away it
becomes begins to become infinitely more
slippery
and that to me is was very interesting
as an idea i mean what does one do
in the face of that uncertainty how do
we respond not only as patients but as
advocates as doctors as scientists to
something that begins to now diversify
so enormously that it begins to become
not just one disease but many diseases i
mean we now know that one breast cancer
doesn't resemble a second breast cancer
so the fact that they happen to arise in
the same anatomical organ belies an
incredible degree of difference and yet
of course if you check the family of
breast cancers there are some deep
resemblances between them uh compared to
the family of of prostate cancer it's a
little bit becomes like recognizing the
human face right i mean we know that
there's certain fundamental features of
anatomy that connect human faces and
obviously we know that faces often come
in families and yet the family of one
face has no resemblance to the family of
another face and yet we can have a
reasonable conversation on water faces
right so so some of that begins to
happen with cancer and to me what was
interesting is in the face of that in
the face of that uncertainty in the face
of that
diversity
what is the response
some of the response is to grapple with
simplicities to grapple with again the
big c cure some other responses are you
know to try to look for these
underlying themes so
the answer to your question what is the
what is the character of this of this
cancer this thing this entity cancer
it is it is it is infinitely slippery it
begins it starts off as one thing but by
the end of the book we realize it's
quite something different
culturally is different metaphorically
it's different and most importantly
biologically it's very different
how did this project originate for you i
mean uh i'm i'm very struck for instance
to hear you say that the idea of casting
is a biography came almost at the end of
the project rather than as a an initial
organizing
principle because frankly it's so neat
um
but uh
you know you're a prolific
run a prolific lab um you have papers
coming out all the time i'm sure you've
got the postdocs nagging at you you have
uh patients cancer patients who are uh i
claim uh their mortality is a claim on
your time um
where did this come from
well i mean
one major impetus was that there was a i
felt that while i was a fellow in
training i thought there was a big
vacuum in this literature i mean there
was a kind of
you can go onto a bookstore or you can
look on amazon there are 5 000 books on
cancer
but the kind of book they were was the
kind of book that i was least interested
in reading myself
you know eat sugars and it'll cure colon
cancer or some nonsense like that um and
and so
i felt as if the this vacuum was
and sophisticated readers i felt as we
sort of almost owed something to
patients because here they were asking
extremely sophisticated questions uh
and you could say that was true for our
culture here our culture is asking very
sophisticated questions journalistic
questions about cancer what is cancer
what happens next where where are we now
what happens next how do we get here is
cancer increasing is it decreasing are
we dying more of cancer are we dying
less of cancer are there more
carcinogens are there less carcinogens
these questions are are deeply part of
our public conversation and yet
there was a i felt as there was very few
attempts to sort of take a step back and
say well what is the story what is the
larger story behind these
sort of conversations that are happening
in a in a kind of uh super stratum as it
were what is this what is the deeper
structure what is the history and then
patients actually began to ask me this
question these questions you know
someone during an interview on the
treatment of breast cancer would say
well how did we
how did how do we ever know that
tamoxifen works how do we get to this
point
or someone else would ask you know who
discovered x y or z right um and i felt
as if all of this could be there was a
story behind all this was a connection
of the series of links
and so i began to keep a journal
often recording these questions i'd put
circles around them and come back to
them and so forth and then by the end of
my first year fellowship i had ended up
with almost
four three or four diaries worth of
notes so these are this is a
conversation with yourself yourself kind
of an internal conversation exactly not
not a diary and a no not a diary in a
day-to-day kind of traditional sense
okay um
and so then i began to sort of wonder if
i if i had this
you know four or five notepads worth of
diaries um
how how does one put this together what
was the what was the next series of
steps that would convert this into a
into into this into a document that is
really a story with the beginning in the
middle and an end um or somewhere and uh
and that's how the project grew okay
well you know we're students of craft
here so so on the one hand this is very
interesting
that you kept a kind of open-ended uh
journal yeah
did you then turn this into a proposal
did you get an agent how does it work
from from your side you're not
you know a nobel laureate uh yet uh uh
uh
you
are
not unlike
us here um a uh a writer starting out uh
uh with a with a day job um uh trying to
find uh uh somebody to get interested in
what is not a beginning project this is
a this is a fairly massive undertaking
you're thinking about how did how did
you frame this as a as a business
proposal i mean as a proposition what do
you think i'll give you two i'll give
you two points about that first of all
uh the first point is about writing as
an expert versus a non-expert it was
very very important to write this book
for me as a non-expert i could not have
written this book as a
nobel laureate just to use one example
but to you but but if i had a kind of uh
inflated sense of seniority um uh in
writing this book i think i would be
this book i would be physically unable
to write this book this workbook would
not have would not come out the way it
did um there is something about i think
the i hope there is something about not
propounding
a theory not having an ego to i mean i
have my own ego i'm not saying that i'm
ego that's what i'm saying but not
having a particular agenda to grind um
which allows this kind of book to happen
again this goes back to the books that i
was talking about you know richard was
not casting himself out to be
the the new historian of
the atomic age right he was writing a
book very specifically about
uh the making of the atomic bomb which
happens to tell us
that you know it happens to inaugurate
right but just for the sake of
discussion richard rhodes is a historian
he's not a nuclear physicist yes he's
you know he's not a richard feynman he's
not a robert eimenheimer he's not an i
robbie he's not in there right uh uh
playing the game he's like he's an
onlooker yes now you're you're you're
doing both you are in there as an
oncologist as a researcher as a
practicing physician um but most
importantly i'm not richard feinman
well you know there are times when i
think richard feynman
wasn't richard feynman
right
but but most importantly i would i'm not
you know as i said the the the gays as
it were yeah was not one of an expert
gays was one of discovery i was more
interested in discovering my history
rather than narrating to you what my
history was
and that process of discovery was
important i'll come back to some
specific instances of that in a second
um and second question is how does one
do this practically mechanically
so it turns out that i was
even though i was producing stuff in bed
i was unable to write a proposal
absolutely unable to write a proposal
because every time i would write a
proposal i would try to say to my try to
say to someone who's going to read this
proposal you know this is how i intend
to write this book
so it was like you know imagine it was
like it was it was one step away from
the actual writing of the book it was
telling someone this will be the content
and to me that felt very empty
partly because i happen to have written
books or sorry i haven't written
articles about you know in science you
don't ever tell someone this is my
future theory
about something or the other right
if someone takes if you read an article
which says this is my future theory that
goes straight into the trash can
so you have to it's it's it's a do and
tell it's not you know it's not you know
you can't you show and you do and you
don't you don't expound about what you
are able in future to be able to do or
possibly might exist in your future
which is essentially what the proposal
is so i struggled and i struggled with
it and someone gave me actually my agent
gave me some very good advice
and um
that was sarah chalfent who works with
andrew wiley
and
who's an amazing reader both entrants
are amazing readers and sarah said you
know what sid you're struggling so much
just write the book just start writing
the book and when you feel as if you are
ready
that's your proposal append something at
the end of it but that's your proposal
so instead of spending hour upon hour
upon hour writing
a book about a book that i was going to
write i just started writing the book
that i was actually going to how long
did you thrash around before you kind of
got to this
epiphany i don't know weeks yeah
weeks and weeks um and then i started on
page one and um and in fact what's
interesting is i'll talk a little bit
about some changes i started page one
and i wrote about
300 odd pages
in you know and i didn't tell anyone
about it
300 pages of the real book
and then approached
people
agents sorry publishers
uh uh about it uh and in bed writing the
300 pages this is like with the laptops
uh
yeah i i use it i'm i'm you know we
we like to think that we invent new
technology in the lab but being
in that position i'm also incredibly
technologically altruistic i have out of
this thing yeah i can barely hack a new
piece you know there's a this article
that someone said recently about earlier
doctors so i'm like i'm the later doctor
i'm the person who comes alive um so i
had a laptop which i adopted too
eventually but i still used pen and
paper i still like pen and paper so i
kept my no my my recurring notes i kept
my painting so you're writing this
you're in bed you're on a laptop yes um
you freed yourself from the tyranny of
the proposal no which is huge which is a
huge barrier
um but this is a very very scholarly
book i mean in a popular way it's it's a
history it's
it's it's excruciatingly detailed right
um in its recreations of various moments
and characters and and uh personalities
and i'm wondering like where are all the
note cards on the quilt i mean are you
how are the file folders arranged
what do you do how do i do that but
physically what i did is i kept all the
notes in in a diary physically written
in a diary so i would go to archive
there's a lot of archival work here a
lot of archival work was being done
actually new york i did a lot of article
work in new york and i when i would go
to the archives i would physically take
notes
i get photocopies file the photocopies
away but then i keep a running diary so
in fact there there was uh while this
was this was in virtual space right on
the laptop in real space what i had was
a
you know what became about a 600 or 800
page running diary of notes this is your
research number that's my risk this is
your lab notebook right there's a
tradition here right so you're used to
kind of keeping this running that's
right uh and i would come stream of
consciousness uh thought process and it
was more than consciousness for instance
you know there would be an article
somewhere or the other and i would have
forgotten it otherwise i would i would
physically write that down if i was more
intelligent i would have some system i
wish i could do this on the computer but
i can't so i physically write it down i
would say you know paper nikolaus
stain
19 circa 1940 look up page this picture
this that or the other sometimes i would
photocopy it so i'd have a photocopied
version of it but the photography made
really i kept that
master book um
and so that that's how i you know that's
how that's done so this is more i had to
confess that at one point when i was uh
reading this i guess the second time i
read it i thought you know because i
hadn't appreciated where in your
chronology this had kind of come and i
because you spent a long time on it yeah
and i saw that it was the product of
something that began during your fellow
yeah term and i thought oh you know are
these his class notes is this like you
know everything siddhartha learned about
cancer while he was doing his residency
you know yeah and he just wrote it all
down and now he's rewritten in a nice
elegant way and that that's how he did
his
you have reporting
lot more going on here i mean you you
allude to it periodically oh a trip to
go find so and so
uh
the the his name escapes me the the
oncologist in south africa who committed
the great fraud right
thank you who you actually went looking
for
um so i was surprised by this you insert
yourself periodically very discreetly
into this text well how long did you
spend
doing the spade words
um well i did the spade work right
through there was no point that i
stopped doing this paid work i mean
usually and this is again this is going
to sound like a little bit of a tourism
but as you know
readers are so smart that they will
discover your discovery
they will figure out in a book when you
are actually discovering something
um
and when you're not when you're sort of
pulling out something from wrote
knowledge um so for me usually the
answer was all almost always when i was
stuck in the book
my answer was go discover it yourself
so for instance um
when i was writing about mammography
which is a i can assure you a
a on one hand politically a very theory
topic
but again
in order to humanize that in order to
put a name to a face
in order to humanize mammography how
does one humanize mammography
i was finding it really hard going
writing about trial after trial of
failed mammography and
my wife at that time was doing some work
at melmo so i said you know what i'll go
to mao moment of course mom was where
the final trial pornography happened now
was it important to go to malmo to in in
the history of writing what mammography
no but for me to go to malmo is very
important just one other example
and actually some of this stuff didn't
even make it into the book
there's a section in the book where i
was very interested in i talk a lot
about
how crucial and how important in terms
of human knowledge the structure human
knowledge these trials that documented
the link between cigarette smoking and
lung cancer work right the invention of
the prospective trial is a very
important moment in medical history
when you follow subjects patients men
and women
forward as opposed to going backward
because we are biases we have very deep
biases in recollection
so you follow patients forward
so that trial was invented really around
solving the link between lung cancer and
smoking so in other words if you could
take a group of smokers and a group of
non-smokers and you could follow them
forward in time and you could develop
you could watch the development of lung
cancer in one group and not in another
group you could
more
convincingly prove that there was a link
between one and the other so it turned
out to i was writing about all of this
and again i felt really kind of stuck
and displaced in it so i thought i would
go to england we're into the very house
physically where this was discovered uh
and
and then i was walking from that house i
took a walk around that vicinity it's in
bloomsbury i took a walk around in
bloomsbury out towards the london school
of tropical health and if you look up
you're at the london school of tropical
health and you figure out you begin to
figure out the connections now these are
just physical connections on the
balconies of the london people who
visited they're on the balcony of the
london school of tropical health
there are um these uh balconies are
gilded there's a very there's a very
beautiful building they're gilded and
there are these sort of great
infectious diseases discoveries of the
19th century you know there's a there's
a there's an anopheles mosquito it's
part of the balcony and then you walk
around the next balcony is a titsy fly
and the next balcony is uh
you know the carrier for or the next
balcony is you know something like that
and if you think to yourself for a
second of course what you really what
you really experience what i really
began to experience there and i'm just
physically now taking it for this for
this walk i kept wondering you know here
you are in the 19th century and a
disease has a simple vector
these things are called vectors
anopheles mosquito is a vector for
malaria because it carries malaria so
here you're in the 19th century
these simple diseases infectious
diseases they're not simple pardon me
it's a complete mistake but these
diseases have
identifiable vectors mosquito malaria
etc and then you come to the 20th
century things start getting so fuzzy
you know is the cigarette a vector
for lung cancer in the same sense that
the mosquito is a vector for malaria um
and this is the discussion that's
happening really in the london school of
tropical health in 1940 people are
saying these chronic diseases like lung
cancer will never have such simple
solution there is not going to be a
mosquito for cigarette smoking there's
never going to be a 60 fly for diabetes
the it's true that too many factors it's
too too much that's too complicated it's
just way too complicated and just just
to give you one more destination in this
journey and that actually so that
doesn't find its way in the book if you
then walk
a few more steps you find yourself on
thread needle street
where the actuarial history the
actuarial business is beginning so this
is the time when shipping is obviously
of deep importance um and if a ship
sinks
then you'll lose all your fortune so you
have to find a mechanism to
to to insure yourself against that
sinking of a ship and so all these
insurance agents are creating equations
to look at risk
that's what they do this is this is so
it doesn't take
a big leap of genius or faith to now
figure out the connections so you have
to essentially borrow the equations from
the actuarial in industry because they
are complex enough to capture real risk
in the real world in a complex world
in order to now begin to understand how
to understand risk in the medical sense
right so you really have gone through it
if you were to take this walk physically
in space you would have gone through a
very important circle
in between 19th century and 20th century
epidemiology which is really an
important circle in between 19th century
and 20th century human epistemic
knowledge right starting from the
mosquitoes on the balcony to the actual
the actual remnants of the actuarial
industry in
in
a thread needle street working yourself
back to where dole and hill were working
out the equations that finally solved
the link between lung cancer and smoking
now
is it absolutely important for you to
take this journey for me to take this
journey to solve to tell the story of
cigarette smoking well maybe not too but
to me it was important because otherwise
i felt as if you know my own pulses
began to lag and i became uninterested
in what i was writing so i said well
every time i had this kind of situation
i usually just went travel to some place
whether it was a laboratory sometimes it
was an interview sometimes it was
finding some person
so it became a research project much
like writing
much like any laboratory discoveries a
research project
so that was that's kind of a glimpse
into process how long did you spend on
this
on the whole book you mean
so
um you know page to page uh and it took
about five and a half years
but then there was a you know the book
like this usually requires about a six
to seven month reading period
um so
in all seriousness you know we sent i
sent it out to
at least about 50 60 people um 50 or 60
people yes that you chose not the
publisher this is yes your own uh peer
review group exactly i
identified my peer review group i was
very
diverse um statisticians you know
uh
harold varmus was one of them but
vogelstein
george canelos tom frey sorry tom i mean
fryright just everyone in the field so
you were very well read before you ever
got published this is not bad i mean
then
uh
how did this work how how did the
feedback come to you what form did it
take what are these what did this do for
you uh letters emails that would follow
up with emails saying you know and i i
had identified specific sections in the
book so that they wouldn't i mean i said
do read the whole book if you can but if
you're unable to do it i would
particularly like you i mean this took a
lot of work uh you know to george
canelo's i would say i'd particularly be
interested in your thoughts about
the history of the development of
chemotherapy for hodgkin's disease and
that happens in page
to 446 and then also in this blah blah
blah blah and then
you know this is what's wonderful about
writing science scientists
really take this kind of work very
seriously and very generously so george
canelos sent me
he doesn't use computers so he sent me a
fax saying
you know this name would be useful to
put in this place
do acknowledge the work of john ziegler
who developed the first chemotherapy
against burkitt's lymphoma in uganda and
so i went back
and meanwhile my publisher was tearing
her hair out
because you know time was passing and i
said no no everyone has to read um
and so then that was inserted in or he
would say you know that piece about
um
this drug is not really right as my
memory serves and do look up to that or
the other so a long reading period six
or seven months reading period in which
there was a lot of sort of scholarly
feedback that i got from people okay
well this may be kind of opening up
something that that would be interesting
for us to explore for a moment which is
you know in science in medicine you know
there's a rich publishing tradition
uh there's a rich uh uh educational
process to teach you to write there's a
a rigorous sometimes painful process by
which
communications about experimental work
or hammered into shape
and then published and then there's what
happens on the other side of the fence
in the in the trade publishing world in
the world of journalism i'm wondering
now that you've found the if you tell us
a little bit about being edited in both
worlds i mean how
what's the experience like for you
writing as a scientist and being peer
reviewed and edited that way
and this uh process on the other side of
the fence where you're writing for a
trade publisher who who may or may not
take the trouble to actually edit your
work and then it sounds like you created
your own peer review system
tell us a little bit more about about
this well so you know a couple of
thoughts about that one is that um i um
one very important thing is i this this
peer review panel that i assembled for
myself
was very broad uh included people who
had
very very very purposely included people
who had absolutely no
history were
were general readers who was reading i
respected who sometimes was writing i
respected but who's reading i respected
more than anything else so i let i went
to them and said well what parts of the
book um are interesting to you where you
get stuck um and i was i listened to
them very acutely i mean um and they're
parts of the book that are that are
motivated by and i can point out one
section for instance um someone said to
me um
i'd written this book you know you had
written
you know as i said it was out in review
um and someone one very good reader said
to me
well you know i i i i
i just don't get mary lasker
you know here is here she is um
she is sitting in uh tell us who mary
laughs
very interesting persona in the book um
a
was born in 1900
became
involved in really transforming the
geography the landscape of american
health
she has a
very important quote in the book which
says that i'm as opposed to illness as
one might be opposed to sin
um so she was she had an evangelical
quality in in the transfer in her in her
desire to transform american health and
she
very unusually for her time was a
philanthropist um
sorry unusually for her time was it was
a was a very prominent entrepreneur um
it was very successful as a
businesswoman
married albert lasker who
people might know from the advertising
world really launches one of the early
in one of the great advertisers of
america
he's part of the reason that we have the
the way the iconography of american and
actually world advertising works is
really a borrowed from albert lasker
this idea of what he called salesmanship
and print advertising should convey
information so mary and laska get mary
and albert get married and then mary
chooses to take all her philanthropic
energy
and divert it towards american health
particularly cancer
phenomenally successful um and so
but the questions that this woman kept
asking me well why why is this lady who
you know is a perfectly quaffed upper
east side lady living in a perfect
apartment on beekman place with
white flowers and
a collection of monets why on earth
would she become so interested in having
the nation cure cancer
and so for me that that meant going back
to the archives and finding the answer
and it turns out that there are three
seminal memories that mary lasker has
and they're actually in the arc in her
archives she talks about one memory in
which she is a child and she is she has
a febrile
uh bacterial illness and she the only
memory is actually very evocative the
only thing she is that she's a child and
the only thing she remembers is someone
saying to her mother her mother's name
was sarah saying sarah you never raised
this child
so that memory stuck with her
so that's one the second memory that she
talks about is
a memory in which she goes to her she
goes with her mother to visit her
laundress
maryland was obviously very wealthy she
had laundresses
and um this laundress had has had breast
cancer this is in the 19
early 20th century and has had a double
mastectomy a double radical mastectomy
now again i don't write about this in
the book but think for a second if
you're a laundress of all the
professions
if you're a laundress and you have a
mastectomy a radical mastectomy the most
common
problem with the radical mastectomy is
that they would take out the deeper
muscles of of the chest and to be alone
and the two complications one of them
that is that you have
you were often not able to move your
your upper shoulders and the second is
that you often would get
not often but occasionally you get
lymphedema very severe swelling because
your lymph nodes have been removed now
think about that as a profession
of all the professions i mean there were
many affected
trying to wash clothes um and so so
that's what i sort of spent time
thinking you know if you were if you
were mary lasker and you wandered into
your laundress house and she had just
had a double mastectomy a radical double
mastectomy what would that feel like
what would that moment be like and she
writes about it in her book and then
finally of course and you can see that
you know sort of the the bells of
history clanging in the back the third
one is that she writes about uh an
illness that she has in 1918
significantly
in which she is confined to her bed so
ill that she thinks she's going to die
and that of course is the flu moving
through
the united states the flu pandemic
moving through the united states
and so again to answer this woman's
question you know we i had to go back in
and
add real detail to flesh out um and so
this was what the peer review process
was like
someone would say and so in contrast um
harold varmus might come back to me and
say you know
i missed um
i missed some important character he
said you know
mary claire king is missing in this
story the woman who
partly discovered brca1 and subsequently
was involved in the discovery of brca2
and i said you're right harold i don't
know why but she is but you need someone
you needed a perspective like that and
so yes merry claire king had to be put
back into this book because her role in
history is important so there were all
these little pieces of information that
was being bombarded by this peer review
process that came back and to me
at least that part of it actually quite
resembles writing a paper a scientific
paper you get criticism
a lot of it
your first response is to say
absolutely not i you know i don't want
to listen
but you know part of the luxury of i
think
i think part of part of being i think a
good writer and a good scientist is to
really take a deep breath every time
someone sends you some criticism and say
you know really there's something in
there um and you can get to to try to
suck it up and
incorporate those ideas if you can
sometimes it's physically impossible to
do but
i should i should add too for those of
you who are uh
you know unfamiliar with the book trade
but
but do a lot of work for magazines uh
you know that kind of of peer review or
read a review or even source review that
is
unheard of
in certain kinds of work in in in book
writing is actually
quite welcome and often
really incredibly helpful it's a great
part of the process to
incorporate folks including
on a limited basis uh you know even
folks who are characters in your book
itself it's just incredibly useful
there may be exceptions to you know if
you happen to be writing about something
that's
highly controversial or confidential but
generally speaking it's an incredibly
useful process that
i'm sure a lot of people authors often
complain about
uh not getting that quality of editing
because the
book editors increasingly are in a
position where they're kind of
forced to act as acquisition editors
most of the time and
but it does seem this funny thing dan
where the more ephemeral
the product the more heavily and
strictly and carefully it's edited the
newspapers which last you know 24 hours
if you're lucky are intensely edited i
mean every word has gone over magazines
very strongly edited um books
often you know the editing is done
because the uh the author read it again
before he or she mailed it in i mean
that's obviously not in the case like
this or or in uh
in many but but increasingly that's
something that book authors often
complain about yeah that's a really
interesting irony of our business that
that you know the more permanent the
product often
the shoddy or the editing or you know at
least at times
so it's it's really important to sort of
incorporate
incorporate people who are uh
on an informal basis that you may not
get in a formal basis and you know the
line edits to me were less interesting
have always been less interesting
in a book like this they're really deep
insights one of them i gave you right
you know getting into the mind of
something and asking a question which is
obviously not a line edit it it's a
it's a it's a query about
internality right what is the interior
space of this person so that was much
more interesting to me and the other
kind of edit was interesting to me is
that
i talked a little bit about this before
there were two or three major
chunks that were moved around in the
book um and i can tell you what they are
yeah no help help yeah
because of chronology because of
thematic issues
there are two for two separate very
separate issues um the first major chunk
that was people who read the book
was the carla story the the story that
really carries us through the entire
book and the carlos story is kind of is
a patient a patient of mine who has
acute lymphoblastic leukemia um and will
become sort of our
our guide to the book in some respect we
come back to her over and over again
now her story really began in the middle
of the book um
and so she was moved right up front
in order to introduce the book
and i'll tell you why um it turned out
that um
the reason uh
one thing again since i'm talking to you
since this is really a conversation
about not only about content but about
style
one thing that's that that i'm very
aware of and perhaps the readers are as
well is that this book lives in its
linings
um it really lives in between in the
connection because there is so much of
physical and temporal space that's being
covered really four 000 years with
200 odd character that's being
characters that has been covered
really in order to tell this story in a
reasonable narrative way it really lives
in the linings between between
individuals and between spaces and i'll
give you a couple of examples yeah what
do you mean by london that's a there's a
moment in the book when um
when i'm telling carla about her first
remission it's a very important moment
in the history of any person's leukemia
the first remission it's a very
important goal and carla reaches that
milestone um i think it happens and i
probably find this space but anyway
so carla reaches that first remission
and i and i tell her this news while i'm
standing physically
um a few doors away from where sydney
farber first discovered chemotherapy
right
and
that is the moment of course uh when i
introduced the fact that sydney farber's
life ends in 1973.
so
that is a it's a it's a lining because
you go now from sidney farber's death in
right back and you jumped back or
forward in this case to 2005 and really
the only connection between them is the
fact that i'm physically standing in the
same space where
this thing was discovered this drug was
discovered and this drug although its
creator has died in this case sydney
farmer has died has allowed this woman
to have her first remission right now
it's a very complicated series of
relationships but they're all pivoted
around the fact that i'm standing at
that exact same site i'm standing right
there and therefore you as a reader
believe me that i've actually created or
allowed me to go and move as a sort of
like a wormhole through space and time
so that's one example there are many
many such examples when you read the
book you realize you know it turns out
for instance someone turns out to be
someone's uncle
right matthew bailey's uncle was john
was john hunter again you know they're
physically separate separated in time
and space but that little connection
between them allows us to move the story
from one generation to the next
generation in to me seemed to me a more
seamless manner so that's what i meant
about the book living in its linings
those linings were really hard to
construct um because what was the
connection how does one move from
telling the story of dolan hill in 1950
to papa nicolau in 1960 right
some of that connection is scientific
once in a while the connection is
happening law might read
dolan hill's paper right and so it
becomes a connection in the sense that
he quotes that paper but some of the
connections are even more how does one
move then from papa nicolas people
discussing prevention and screening how
does one move from papa nicolas work to
um
to the uh to strax's work on mammography
right the way that i move in the book is
in fact they happen to be again we move
in physical space in that case
uh
papa nicolas work is happening on the
east river in the 60s and if you walk if
you were to walk about a few blocks west
you would come to the place where strax
placed his first van for mammography
in on along central park
because women
he wanted to get he wanted to capture
women obviously and
uh
women wouldn't travel because when they
were working women they wouldn't travel
uptown to clinics so he decided to
outfit a van uh to put a mammography
machine this is like the mountain in
muhammad right he put a machine inside a
van and he parked it outside central
park so that women during their office
breaks could come and just get their
mammograms done
and so the connection in that case to
move from tapa nikolao's vision of
cervical cancer screening to the
contemporary vision of breast cancer
screening really occurs in physical
space and and
you know when you read the book you
figure out what i'm talking about so all
these little tiny little linings that
how arbitrary are you in your research
phase of being self-conscious and
knowing you're going to need
you know this bit of connective tissue
that little bit of connective tissue i
need to go find something
that physically
links these things
uh i better go back to the archive i
better go look for or i mean sometimes
it's sometimes it's obvious because
those are very
key narrative very very canary but
they're the hardest to do actually um
sometimes sometimes they were obvious as
i said sometimes someone read someone's
paper and really was responding to
something you know science is a
conversation
that's what that's what makes it that's
what makes our life easier right um i
write in the book somewhere i said you
know scientists are more interested in
history than even historians because
everything that we do is
is is a reply to someone else every time
i write a paper i'm really writing back
to someone in my past right this is this
is part of the grand you know
we take it very lightly but it's amazing
that in fact we're having a grand
conversation which has gone on for about
you know 600 700 years
and we're writing back to someone who's
a generation behind us or et cetera but
anyway so sometimes it's easy because
you know you someone's reading someone's
work and you're replying to someone
else's work but sometimes it's not so
easy sometimes you don't know why on
earth
you move from
one vision of
screening for instance to another and
then you have to find then you have to
really go and try to find something that
acts as a spark between one and the
other and that's very hard to that for
me was very hard to do
i i want to ask kind of a tone and
structure question here um
and uh uh
i'm trying to think how to how to sort
of open this particular box um you know
there's a there's a as you as you
alluded at the beginning you go into any
bookstore there's a huge section devoted
to cancer much of it is prescriptive
right to be sure you know
cure this this diet
but quite a lot of it is is uh in grows
out of that mary lasker tradition which
is this sort of relentlessly
um
uh optimistic relentlessly
propagandistic relentlessly
um forward into the future toward the
big c cure right tone
history of cancer
yes um what you do in this book is
interesting each of these sections
actually is remarkably pessimistic they
sort of almost sort of the story of a
of a research
effort that has
moved
forward only by kind of falling over i
mean and uh yet the overall picture
somehow still ends up being optimistic
i'm still trying to figure out how you
pulled that off
i mean it was not conscious but what i
wanted to what i wanted to achieve as i
said was a it kind of uh
maybe
it's a it's not the best word but a kind
of scholarly perspective on on what
happened um and often you know
the
the this discovery process like many has
been very cartoon you've really had to
tumble to the bottom of
the the slope in order to climb
ourselves back out again right so that
was that really is the structure of the
book you start off with this huge
optimism at some point of time in the
1950s 1960s and then you keep falling
and you keep falling and you keep
falling and you keep falling on falling
and you reach the mid 1980s and
but but you don't do this in the
abstract i mean put yourself in the in
the position of the woman getting
not radical mastectomy but radical
chemotherapy in 1984. you know maggie
jenks
who says who writes very very poignantly
she says um it was like being thrown out
of a jumbo jet without a parachute um
uh and you know and it's a very very
beautiful passage in her book it's a
thin little pamphlet uh very moved me
particularly she said uh you know there
you are you're sleeping you're on a on a
transcontinental flight you're fast
asleep and someone comes and says hello
mrs jenks wake up wake up wake up the
door is open and now you go go now and
then there she is and she's bewildered
and she's falling out of the plane and
she says to herself
what word am i inhabiting so
that's just an example of of how
bewildering it was to inhabit
the the world of cancer and and
continues to be for for many reasons um
what i'm trying to say here is that the
um
the the
structure of the book
um had to take into account the fact
that this is not a linear history
yeah this is a history that will have
five steps backwards to go three steps
forwards and and we as readers have to
be sophisticated now as science readers
but as readers of anything as we do any
form of fiction or non-fiction have to
be sophisticated enough to be able to
contend with that we might we should be
able to be go to to go
three steps sideways
we should be able to respect each other
as readers to be able to go three steps
sideways knowing that that will
ultimately lead to four steps sideways
again maybe you know this is a this is a
discursive process it's a narrative
process um history a particular history
of science doesn't happen anyone who
spent one nanosecond in the laboratory
knows that the history of science
doesn't happen such that you know one
bit of progress is piled onto another
bit of progress like building a lego uh
that's not what happens um
we take steps backwards steps forward
step sideways those are important and
those are played out and this is what's
crucial they are played out in the lives
of human beings um you know
these trials rode on the backs of
hundreds of thousands of
patients
and so
you know it would be a it would be a
peculiar falsity um
and it would go against the grain and
the tone of this book to write a weak
history of cancer
it would be it would be just what i
wanted not to do
what kind of response now as a popular
matter the book has gotten enormous
enormously favorable reception but
i'm wondering what the response from
within the medical community
has been um there's you know a famous
track record of scientists who
do have some knack for reaching out to
the public to communicate
find themselves uh
uh
criticized by their peers for uh
unseemly behavior and uh there's some
famous examples of this but i'm just
curious
if that's well so to some extent of
course you know this is not i hope this
is not that kind of book uh
in the sense that you know again i
didn't have this doesn't have a
again this goes back to the idea of me
not being an expert um
i didn't have a
that particular kind of ego agenda to
fulfill so i didn't get that kind of
response but that said that the response
has been extraordinary generous the
reviews in
landsat and nature medicine have been
just as
generous as the reviews in you know
in
in other places and so the response has
been just extraordinarily generous um
one thing i did
one thing i did do in the book is you
know i and there's a big disclaimer up
front is actually i was not terribly
interested part of the reason being that
i was not interested in writing this big
history
of saying you know he discovered or she
discovered something or the other and
then this was followed by that discovery
of something other blah blah blah blah
blah blah
instead i changed i hope i changed the
focus of the book to patients
um every time there's a story in the
book a major discovery in the book that
discovery is pinned on a human being and
and i try to get in i try to discover
these people you know try to find who
the longest term survivor of of leukemia
chemotherapy is who is the
longest term survivor of herceptin these
people should be i think
icons in our history these people change
the way we imagine the world we imagine
medicine
so by doing that also i sort of
almost
decapitated the the the monster of
scientific rivalry at its face i said
you know this book is not about i'm not
going to write a book about who
discovered something first um i will try
to tell the story to the best of my
ability but there's a process within
science that rewards
um
an appropriate there's a whole
discursive process that rewards who
discovered what first and the scientists
can figure that out my real interest is
you know who's barbara bradfield um who
is robert sandler
who's ella the woman that you know
survives the first the first really
intensive round of chemotherapy what
where is she today what happens to her
tomorrow
and by doing so by shifting the focus
what i was trying to say is that you
know medical history
could be written
through the eyes of
scientists and doctors but to me that's
that
i'm not interested in that i'm more
interested in the medical history that
is written or could be written
from the from that from the eyes of
people who encounter it the most
proximally um to me their stories are
more interesting um and and whenever as
i said whenever i was stuck i i
generally had two solutions when i was
stuck when i was stuck in this book my
two solutions were go to the place or
find the person um
and um and every time this happened you
know writing about perception the
discovery perception i was writing about
the laboratory et cetera et cetera and i
said to myself but where is
you know where is the woman who was
being treated
i was writing about leukemia and i
told the story elsewhere um
i had to travel 6 000 miles through a
series of accidents to find the child to
whom this book is dedicated um
through a series of accidents um i told
the story elsewhere so
um
uh you know to me that was much more
interesting than
telling the story of
great discoveries by great
scientists a few things few medical
issues are
as thoroughly and obsessively covered in
the general media as cancer cancer
treatment and the possibilities of
cancer cures cancer pharmaceuticals
i'm sort of wondering
from your perspective both as a as a as
an oncologist and as a practitioner but
also as a as someone who's
displayed some some skill writing about
this for the general public
what that
coverage looks like to you what are its
flaws what are its virtues
well i think one of the questions that
is
there is an over granularity
in it over granularity what do you feel
as if you you're losing the
the uh forest for the trees if you
simply looking so in other words you
there is an obsessive quality in which
every footstep forward backwards
sideways is covered
leaving open the question well what's
the real what's the real difference in
in science we often make a distinction
between statistically significant and
biologically meaningful so in other
words you know you might have a
phenomenal that's different between this
and this and if you sample it enough
times you can make it statistically
significant but this difference might
not be biologically meaningful so there
are many things that are
so
what you're really trying to do in
biology as a scientist i think is trying
to get to what is biologically
meaningful statistics allows you to
generate um
confidence confidence against biases
um that prevent us from having
conversations about science that's what
the role of statistics is right it
allows us to have a conversation about
science where you and i can have a have
that conversation without indulging in a
certain series of very traditional human
psychological perception perceptual
biases right
but but the biological meaning of
something has very little to do with
statistics it has to do with the nature
of the universe it has to do with truth
it has to do with truth telling it has
to do with whether one medicine is
really changes this the way we live
longer we live better we live more
dignified lives that's the real
biological meaning um
and i think that's what's lost to me
when i read a newspaper article i'm
saying you know this curve showed some
increase and it was statistically
significant who cares if it's
statistically significant or not right
to me what i'm looking for always is as
a and some i'm talking about as a
scientist i'm saying to myself what was
it was it meaningful i mean was it
meaningful so just to give you an
example some drug comes along and
extends the life
of someone by
six months and asking to myself is that
meaningful i don't mean that in a
condescending way is it meaningful in
the history of this drug in the history
of this disease
where has that moved us
you know in melanoma we have this new
drug it's immunological therapy which is
successful in it was just approved by
the fda two weeks ago right and it shows
an increase in metastatic advanced
metastatic melanoma of about six to
eight months
of increased survival
in patients who took this drug and so
the question when i'm reading this i'm
asking myself well tell us a little bit
about the history of failed drugs
against melanoma tell us a little bit
about why this is important and the
answer is this this idea of awakening
the immune system against cancer was
really a dead field it was it was so
dead that no scientist would touch it
and so really this drug awakens a dead
field that's to me more interesting than
than than you know the
you know the more minor statistics about
the drug the fact that melanoma was a
disease metastatic melanoma there was no
drug in the history of all chemicals
that were ever tried that had changed
the survival of patients with metastatic
melanoma so i'm going to repeat that
because it's so important there was no
drug
in the history of metastatic melanoma
that in a randomized trial to my
knowledge had increased the lifespan of
a patient
that's why this drug is important
because it proves a principle it begins
it opens a new story
now
to me that's all of this is very
important reading an article about how
someone's life was increased by six
months
i'm not so impressed by
so you think there's a misplaced focus
on there's a mistake focus on what
progress means there's a misplaced
understanding of what is what is forward
what is backwards um there's a misplaced
understanding of again i think that
every footfall gets covered so acutely
you know
everything becomes so acutely covered
that you begin to misplace
uh
you don't get the sense of what to me
what often i don't get the sense from
reading what the real what the real meat
is what the real importance is of
something so that's my that's my
personal bias so do you feel that blogs
are delivering that in a way that
conventional daily journalism doesn't
uh i don't read blogs
it's just an interesting point because
you get
you get more of a discursive
kind of approach often
you know that you know traditional
journalists like me would look at and
say well that's rambling
but
but other other people might look at it
and make the same point that you're
making which is that
know that this is
this is storytelling and it's and it's
it's not creating some sort of
false novelty or out of context novelty
and instead it's
it's trying to tell a bigger story in
in pieces right uh and
in a sense something is happening in
journalism where we're
we're seeing more of that you know we're
seeing more of an emphasis on
on the story and a little bit less on
the
omg look
here's what's new right okay
i i hope so i mean i think some of that
is important i i don't i unfortunately
don't read blocks i don't know what
i don't like to read them interesting
well i think it's a matter of kind of
self-discipline
in your copy of spare time you don't
have to yeah
so in your copious spare time um
he's been a number of years on this
project is this is this a is this is
this a one-time uh
uh thing in the uh
in the in the life of the siddhartha
mukherjee or is this something that you
now have developed a set of muscles a
set of
literary
techniques habits
establish your primacy to your half of
the bed as a working area and
you know there is a there is a tradition
happily being revived with many of your
colleagues who regularly now
write
not necessarily about their specialty
but out of their specialty um uh group i
know jerome grootman ethel dwandy there
are others
who then inform
coverage um i mean is that something
that you plan to do or have you have you
had your great success and you're going
back to the lab while you're ahead
uh
i don't know the answer to the question
i mean you know i think this book was
written to answer a question and what
was the question the question is what is
the history of cancer
so
the
if i have a question then i'll write
another book
as opposed to writing a book for the
sake of writing book i mean you know i
have to think of a question first if
there's a question that's worth to me
that inspires an interesting series of
thoughts and
answers i will try to answer that
question but to me
to me at least
as a writer
for me personally books work best when
they answer questions
and this book was written to answer
questions i'm going to wait until i have
another good question and i'll answer
that question in the book
how do you think that how do you think
that question
was different
how do you think how how was
you know what is the history of cancer
why was your
question or or more importantly your
answer
different
given the fact that you're an oncologist
i mean then you know how how
you know in some obvious ways it
affected the book strongly you know it
it gave you a base of tremendous
knowledge but beyond that it seems to me
that it it may have had
a sort of a more reaching
a more far-reaching
effect
of how you chose to answer that question
so what let you talk a little bit about
that maybe i mean you know
being an oncologist and writing a book
about cancer is is fundamentally a
humbling experience uh
you know you don't need to read very
much deeply into this book to figure out
from its first chapter that
that big problems are generated and they
generate even bigger problems
um called
the radical mastectomy rather than that
i could name the whole history of our
sullied
uh discipline
so some of it was to contend with that
um but then the unusual parts of the
book i mean i'll just give you one more
example
there's a part of the book
sometimes it's
i i learned this from
my wife was a sculptor and sarah says
sometimes
it's very important to do something very
wrong
in the middle of a book or in the middle
of a
something that's so wrong that it
actually
stylistically becomes right um there's a
point in the book that i really that i
really debated and there's a part of the
book i'll tell you exactly which part it
is part of the book in which i talk
about the birth of my daughter um in the
hospital
and
i mean you know you can insert yourself
in a book in different ways and now
in this very somewhat flat-footed part
of the book i was not only inserting
myself as a
as an oncologist writing about the
history of cancer now i was talking
about a father
writing about the birth of my daughter
in the hospital where i happened to
practice oncology right so now i've not
only taken myself away from
the the relatively comfortable zone of
authority um
or even of discovery as i said i didn't
want to be an expert i didn't want to be
to have that voice of authority but
taken away from that place and
and started talking about being a father
as well as simultaneously being a doctor
um and being within the same hospital
where i start this my sub-specialty and
so i went through this complicated
process of trying to eliminate that that
piece from this book um and then nan
said you know every time i read that
fast i keep coming back to it um
and
she said it keeps haunting me this idea
of you sitting there cutting leela's
umbilical cord
and harvesting her stem cells
and then i said well then why not put it
in i mean why not keep it back in
and
readers will figure out really what the
connections are then between
between all of those things so that's
just one example of ways in which the
way that you in
intersect
in my case my academic discipline with
my writing can become very complicated
and sometimes that
very weird flat footed complication is
actually fits
because that's the way you really feel
it
give it just to follow up on that you
know one of the things that we
we tell ourselves in journalism just one
of the stories that we tell ourselves
about how important we are uh
is that we like to say that
you know we're the surrogate for the
reader we understand the reader in in
the sense that the expert you know never
can and and therefore we do we deliver
the story in a way that
that someone who actually knows what
they're talking about like you uh
can't
you know your book
puts the lie to that
but
beyond that
i'm wondering like when you
this is what i was trying to get at
before when when you said you know the
question that
that inspired you was what is the
history of cancer are you do you feel
you're asking that as an oncologist as
somebody who already
really knows a lot about cancer or
are you somehow trying to be someone
else are you trying to be uh
you know this ideal reader
and therefore in doing so how does that
change
the process i mean who are you really
writing for are you writing for yourself
or do you have some imagined reader that
you're i mean i had an imagined person i
had an imagined reader
i was
i was not writing as an oncologist i
mean i was writing outside it happened
to be that i was an oncologist that i
had a certain set of i mean this is how
i really imagined i said to myself
i have a certain set of advantages and a
certain set of disadvantages in writing
this book i have a little bit of a
wealth a fund of knowledge but really if
you were
if you were
if you were a journalist
and you did the leg work you would find
this fund of knowledge this fund of
knowledge is not private knowledge
i'm not jim watson writing about the
discovery of dna being jim watson in
cambridge in 1950 something
at that moment of time
so that knowledge is i'm not privy to
that knowledge this is common knowledge
um so that's one aspect of it but then
on the flip side to say that i'm not
part of the process not of the genesis
part of the process immersed in it
is also to deny the reality of who i was
writing from there's a book that um that
i that actually quite like that that
there are versions of there's a kind of
it's a much it's it's a
thinner book
um
in um in which uh
uh adam wishart tries to get to the
history of cancer through the diagnosis
of his father's cancer prostate cancer
and again there is he's a journalist he
has the capacity to access the fund of
knowledge but really it's his father's
cancer that that motivates him to write
this book it becomes a driving force and
for me it was discovery it was answering
the question but not answering the
question
what is the history of a cancer to the
oncologist
to me was what is the history of cancer
in human intellectual life in our our
common shared intellectual history um
because this disease is is
clearly of that importance uh that we
need to have
a a conversation about it in the public
realm which transcends the the minor
discoveries of the history of oncology i
don't know if i'm answering the question
it was written very actively
to a lay
to lay reader
yes please yeah i just wanted to ask you
about something you were saying earlier
i just thought it was it was interesting
that you were talking about some of your
peer reviewers that were your colleagues
got back to you and and they were saying
you know you left some of these names
out some of these people that i think
you should put in and and i mean
particularly with cancer cancer there's
probably thousands of people you could
have
put in and i feel like that's kind of
typical with science journalism is that
even if you're writing about one paper
you know you talk to somebody and they
want you to mention all of their
colleagues and everybody's who's
contributed it and you go to your editor
and they're like no you're crazy you
can't put all those people in because
your reader will fall asleep before they
get through all the names and i'm just
wondering if if you ever kind of found
yourself in that place where you had to
choose between
um
telling a story that was readable and
clear and making sure you put in
everybody that deserved credit and what
did you decide this is very important
that's a very important question and so
you know i i struggled with it a lot um
and clearly there were many many
instances where that happened i said i
gave you one
thing i said i immunized myself i
vaccinated myself against some of this
up front by saying i'm not going to tell
the stories you know you guys
there's a complicated and very well
established scientific process by which
by which reward is given you figure it
out yourselves
i'm not gonna you know there's a big i
write about i wrote about it right on
the author's note up front um
your business um so so it required i
think it requires a certain kind of
self-confidence or confidence to do that
to say you know the stories everyone
knows you know i know this story is more
complicated than i'm just telling you
this but here are the important
milestones in this story because
milestones needs to be drawn because
otherwise the story will not be told so
that's that's one piece of it the second
piece of it was and follows from the
first and i said well their discoveries
being made every day
um
my sniff test for something getting into
this book was
does that discovery has that discovery
had a human impact
so i'll give you an example there's a
lot written about telomerases right very
important in the history of developing
history of cancer but telomerases are
yet not have not converted themselves
there's still a scientific reality a
laboratory reality but we don't have an
anti-telomerase medicine for instance
right there's no patient whose life has
been changed as far as i know by the
discovery of telomerase right that will
happen i hope it will happen eventually
but that was sort of my threshold um uh
the the the discovery the molecular
oncogene has changed the way we imagine
patients the way we we treat them the
rca1 vrc2 i could tell you story upon
story so that was one criteria
and that allowed me to to really draw
kind of a a
strong line discrimination between what
could be included and what could not be
included and then the final thing was in
the whenever i had to choose between um
and a scientist's story and
a scientific story that was linked in or
tied in
to a patient story i always chose the
latter so i allowed the patient so so
the reason that dennis layman comes into
the story is because of
barbara bradfield's story which needs to
be which i thought needed to be told so
everyone the scientists become the
satellites around the the main orbits
are our patients and that was just the
way i chose to tell the story
right down here
yeah
so when you're reaching out to the
patients and the patient's family
what does that email or phone call sound
like and what was sort of the range of
responses you got from patients
in terms of writing the book yeah or in
terms of no in the process when you
reached out to a patient or somebody
living or somebody's family who had
passed away what um sometimes sometimes
they didn't want to talk about it
something they didn't want to be
interviewed i mean i kept everything
anonymous
i changed some i changed some critical
pieces of identity to keep with so that
i wouldn't violate hipaa for instance
um and that was complicated i tried not
to do it
there
but essentially i tried to keep
try to keep to what the real experiences
were um some of them were very
forthcoming you know the woman with the
woman who um i'll just tell you one
story i the
um
i was looking
for a long time to find this woman who
was the
longest term survivor of uh of them
chemotherapy
um
and um the first
the first cures of childhood nephrologic
leukemia
and
the way i found her was i was looking on
amazon for a medical textbook a textbook
on cancer and then the nice thing about
amazon it's like a library these days
you go from one thing to another thing
to another thing and somewhere along the
comments of one of these it was not a
textbook it was really a memoir on
cancer this woman had written i survived
childhood leukemia in
1950 and i had been so accustomed by
that point of time to figuring out that
you know depending on what age you were
i knew exactly what therapy would have
gotten because i was looking up this
history so i you know based on what she
said i said this has to be she has got
to have been treated with that
um she has got to be part of the first
cohort so i just called her up blindly
um and i said you know i introduced
myself i think i wrote an email first i
introduced myself and i said you know
here's my identity i'm trying to write
this book and she said of course i was
treated with that drug combination
obviously with vamp i have you know i
still have severe neuropathy from the
vin christine um and so then i drove out
to maine to see her she was in maine and
that's how
you know that's how i found her some
people had they were different
you know there were different thresholds
um i tried to respect
whatever people had
certainly plenty of cases to choose from
um this
i think you turned it off
um
so when you were writing these emails um
to patients or when you were calling
them
did you
mention your affiliation with
whatever university you were at the time
or were you writing this book as like
sort of a private citizen i mean did you
keep your email signature i i don't
remember exactly what i did in terms of
whether i did on occasion say that i was
trump but i tried i tried to mention the
most important thing is that i tried to
mention i was writing a book um
i don't remember whether i said i would
i certainly did say i was an oncologist
because that would not that you know
not make any sense otherwise i don't
remember if i mentioned exactly what my
credentials
can you tell us a little bit more about
the child to whom you dedicated the book
yeah um
you know
some people have this might be repeated
story but i'll tell it anyway um
so as i said my writing process
my writing process is very linear um
and so i although i kept a recurring set
of notes but i was i was writing in a
very linear manner um and so i was
and i had promised myself as one of the
things in the tone of the book that i
would in fact
try to try to find patients
and so i was writing about sidney
farber's discovery of the first
chemotherapy methotrexate
and i knew that he had these flickering
remissions in 1948
by the way i was just recently finished
a month of rounds and i began i begin my
month of rounds
by noting that in 1947 1948 in 1955
every child with lipoglossic leukemia
died every single one of them 100
today we cure about 80 percent of these
children maybe sometimes 90 depending on
the genetic backgrounds and one of the
things about being an oncologist one of
the peculiarities about being an
oncologist is that we won't know we will
never know whether we are living in the
1955 of metastatic melanoma
or we will continue to live in the 1955
metastatic melanoma for our generations
that uncertainty is a you know for an
intern or a resident or and actually for
for an attending to swallow that
uncertainty is very complicated um and
the only way
i think that one swallows that
uncertainty is by figuring out that in
1955 when they were treating these
children
um
you know someone could say to them why
bother why go through the motions it's a
100 lethal disease
why go through the motions of iterative
trial running
this child is going to die anyway
and the problem is that
that the uncertainty is ultimately what
generates a kind of scientific hope for
us because we don't know and we'll never
know we won't know if this new drug or
this new trial or this new thing that
you're trying for someone with melanoma
or advanced stage breast cancer is going
to make a difference or as i said
whether we're going to and so it's it's
it's an amazing situation it's sort of
like the uncertainty is like the vaccine
against the nihilism uh because you can
become so nihilistic in oncology um
uh
and and
so that's you know that's the
that's just a quick aside so very quick
uh uh answer to you know how i found the
story um i was looking for this for the
series of children these cohort of
children and i couldn't find them
anywhere
um and then i was got dejected and i
took a trip to india to my parents house
in india um and someone said there was a
sydney farmer had collaborated with the
chemist in discovering this chemical the
chemist was an indian chemist uh his
name was yela subarao
and there's a biographer yellow super
has only one biographer so someone said
go talk to the yella's biographer
so he happened to live a few blocks from
my parents house in delhi so i said fine
i'll go talk to you as biographer
so i went to yale's biography talked for
an hour and a half and as i was leaving
he said to me
by the way i visited farber's clinic in
1948 and i have a roster of all his
patients that he was treating because i
was working on yella's biography and i
kept newspaper cuttings with pictures
of these kids
would you be interested
so i said yes absolutely i'm interested
and so i
found therefore
in that clipping set i found
the child's name and his face
and so it became a metaphor for me
that you know six thousand miles away
from where i was in boston trying to
find this child but six thousand miles
away is where i ultimately found the
child i could come back
to boston and then
discover i actually i talked about going
to places i could find his name uh i
found his name obviously in the rec in
the in the
city records his death certificate in
city records i could find his house and
then 15 minutes away from where i
originally started having gone right
around the world i could make a
15-minute journey and i could stand in
his house i went to his house and i
looked out through what his house was on
louisville avenue until i had physically
found myself in the place where this
childhood was born and died
there's a quick epilogue to the story
and that is so i dedicated my book to
robert sandler his name was robert
sandler
and the quick epilogue story is that my
book was published and 10 days after the
book was published
nan graham called me up and said you
know you're willing to sit down i was
writing a grant in my office and she
said you just sit down because there's a
phone call
so i picked up the phone and it was this
child's twin
his name is elliot sandler and he had
walked into a bookstore in maine he
lived in maine but never found his
family walked into a bookstore in maine
opened the book and found the dedication
to his brother
who had died 70 60 something years
before
and so you asked me about you know what
how people what the reception of this
book has been then the nicest phrase
that i got from this before this book
and i've closed on this note the nicest
phrase is that helen sandler the mother
whose picture is in the book actually
was is still alive and the sanders are
jewish
um
and when robert had died at three years
old the farber had begged helen to allow
him to autopsy the child i mean helen
had said no that's a violation of the
body i'm not going to allow you to open
this child's body up
and finally after a lot of begging she
had finally agreed
and she said that the decision had
haunted her for 67 years
because she kept coming back to it over
and over again
and the nicest thing that anyone has
ever said about this book is that it
brings for helen she said that that
brought
her chapter too close
and so you know that's the amazing thing
about writing about medicine is that you
think you're writing about something but
in fact you're writing to someone else
about something else and the world moves
around in
complicated temporal and physical
circles
i you know had a
oh
go ahead no no please oh i
i just wanted to make sure that people
know who our next question is i know my
students may not know um
this is professor suketu mehta uh who is
a wonderful nonfiction writer and
a great resource here at the institute
for my students and others so it's okay
to raise your hand so we can all see who
you are
and uh here i'll give you the microphone
thank you ryan um so that i'd like to
ask you about
a question related to storytelling so
you do
these two very different kinds of
writing one is the
scientific
yeah it's a little it's a little muddy
yeah
so i'd like to ask about storytelling
what you do these two different kinds of
writing one is in the scientific
journals and
peer-reviewed studies in nature etc
which
have to be
clinical bereft of emotion and then
there's this book
which has this wonderful narrative drive
to it and i know you read a lot of
fiction and which clearly has informed
the book
but also you're
not just any kind of doctor you're not a
um
a dermatologist
you you have to
tell people that you know they're going
to die
so in that in delivering that kind of
diagnosis
there must be a narrative that
accompanies
uh this delivery of this news
and
so i'd like to talk about how
these
things are related how you deal with
that kind of
um
the emotion of
dealing with your patients how that
has influenced your book maybe that
produced a need in you to write this
book because that the chapter about your
daughter i found very affecting and i
think it would have been a lesser book
without stories like that so how did you
infuse this book with that kind of
emotion which really
took it beyond the usual run of
medical books and made it so widely
accessible and so necessary for people
who um
may not may only have a passing
acquaintance with the disease
well i have a couple of thoughts about
it one thought is that you know you have
to be
in writing about medicine i think you
have to have a very
you have to titrate the emotion very
carefully um and that's why i went i
referred again but i would refer you
back to me i referred myself back to
primo's book
how does one
learn from the master of that craft
the
the writing of that i mean there's a
wonderful interview which i read over
and over again in which many years later
i'm going to paraphrase a little bit
he was asked why he survived
the camps and he said
by the way people know that he was a
chemist
and
his chemistry very deeply informed
his writing he's written about that
in the periodic table for instance um
but he said something very interesting
to me he said i survived because of two
reasons number one i was young and
number two i spoke a little bit of the
language i spoke a little bit of german
think a second for this answer about
this answer right
the lack of heroism in that answer
um
the the
the not only the humility but the
granularity of it um the smallness of it
um to me that was very important um
so
that was the kind of
that was the kind of emotional titration
that i think is important in writing a
book you can't
grief in this book or in any book like
this can become its own over-indulgence
um
doctors grieve
uh doctors should grieve um
but
you know who are you to grieve i mean
you know that you know it's like someone
is like when you go to a doctor and you
say you know i have a headache and the
doctor said you have a headache
so uh
you know
your grief as a physician has always put
into context of the much greater grieves
of of patients so you have to realize
that upfront you didn't deal with it but
on the other hand you're a human being
i'm a human being i go through the
process of grief there's a
man in the hospital that we tried in my
sort of i mean just went through this
house
this is what this is a peculiar thing
about how intense medicine is um
i was as i said i was on call for a
month before
and um i had a series of patients and i
had this there was a young man and i'm
again not violating any laws when i when
i tell you about the story young man
with leukemia um a relapse not really
leukemia who came in who
is from the dominican republic and
i became this was part of my it brought
out some kind of incipient heroism in me
i thought i must save this man you know
imagine that sort of moment of pride
that you have right i must save this man
um so and and my my fantasy about this
man was that i was i was going to bridge
him to a transplant i was getting
transplanted his leukemia was not
responding to chemotherapy i would give
him enough chemotherapy and his
transplant could only be done in
bethesda
and i kept saying to myself if i can
just get him on the train to bethesda
i'd be a happy man so i called up the
festive organized all of this called up
bethesda they were ready to receive him
they have they have a cord blood donor
and i had this fantasy this
you know if i could just see him off on
the train i would be a happy person
and so this morning this afternoon
actually as i took this to the train
back to come
to nyu i finished my month i wrote it
off for about three days and i'm just
beginning to do follow-ups and i meet
one of the interns who's coming off her
night shift on the train and i say well
what's going on with mr l because i'm
going to go to tomorrow
and she says to me he's relapsed
so
so my whole train ride essentially it
becomes this kind of weird ride into a
into a tunnel right i mean here i am
just you know kind of thinking of myself
as the great
big hero and i had this fantasy for
three days you know i'm gonna go back
he's gonna he's going to be fine he's
going to go
if he's going to go to a history and go
to the tesla will be a transplant
everyone's going to be happy and hunky
dory and so and meanwhile so i sat for
about 40 minutes
thinking to myself you know
how
how anyway
um
so
i think you know when you write well the
reason i'm telling you the story is i
think when you write about medicine
you have to find the right titration um
and it's not obvious what that titration
is
it really lives inside the actual fabric
of the writing
um
very unsatisfying answer no it's a very
satisfying answer actually um i've been
brooding about a question earlier about
why you write in the nature of
communication
and you know
authors insert themselves in their books
and you have certainly inserted yourself
here quite artfully and and uh and
intentionally but
when authors do that they also
occasionally hold a mirror up to
themselves
and
there is a moment
in here which i'd like to read to you
very interesting it's actually the one
on the one moment of unalloyed
admiration in this entire book
it involves a
lung cancer specialist named thomas
lynch
and you are with him he's about to see a
patient 66 year old woman
who
is very afraid she's about to get a
death diagnosis
and i'll read
a passage here if i may
because i think it goes to the heart of
something about your medical writing
why you might do it
i was about to enter the room when lynch
caught me by the shoulder and pulled me
into the side room he had looked through
her scan and her reports
everything about the excise tumor
suggested a high risk of recurrence but
more important he had seen fits folded
over in fear in the waiting room
right now he said she needed a something
else a resuscitation he called it
cryptically as he strode into her room
i watched him resuscitate
he emphasized process over outcome and
transmitted astonishing amounts of
information with a touch so slight that
you might not even feel it he told fitz
about the tumor the good news about the
surgery asked about her family and then
spoke about his own he spoke about his
child who was complaining about her long
days at school did fitz have a
grandchild he inquired
did a daughter or a son live close by
and then as i watched he began to insert
numbers here and there
with a light-handedness that was a
marvel to observe
you might read somewhere that for your
particular form of cancer there's a high
chance of local recurrence or metastasis
he said perhaps even 50 or 60 percent
and she nodded tensing up
well
there are ways that we will tend to it
when that happens
i noted he had said when
not if the numbers told us statistical
truth but the sentence implied nuance
we will tend to it he said not we will
obliterate it
care
not cure
the conversation ran for nearly an hour
and in his hands information was
something live and molten ready to
freeze into a hard shape at any moment
something crystalline yet negotiable
he nudged and shaped it like glass in
the hands of a glassblower
that moment
of
necessary resuscitation through
information
i think is what you've done so
marvelously in this history of cancer
and i thank you for taking more than an
hour
with us in our room to talk to us about
why you write and how you do it
and you know we i
have learned a couple of really
interesting things in our conversation
and i thank you for that and i thank you
so much for coming up here this evening
you certainly um we still got a few
bottles of wine left and a little food
so help yourself
come back
um
so what i did is i proposed uh
because it's a wonderful intersection
and i don't have to pretend
is
yes
that was
this
what's up
thank you
myself
mr
foreign
wow
thank you
oh
brownie
um
yes
you